# 发酵工艺英文版

Fermentation process video

The fermentation process is a process in which microorganisms are grown and propagated under certain culture conditions to produce metabolites. It is necessary to select suitable culture equipment and process control conditions for different microorganisms to achieve optimal culture efficiency.

Under our conscious induction, the metabolites of microorganisms are the "products" we need. There are many types of these products, such as MSG, sodium glutamate, amino acids, antibiotics and some other drugs. Below we will make a comprehensive knowledge sharing of the basic concepts of fermentation process, fermentation medium preparation, fermentation medium sterilization, air sterilization, fermentation process control, fermentation tank exhaust treatment and fermentation key equipment.

## The Basic Concept of Fermentation

### 1. The characteristic of Fermentation
First, normal temperature and pressure. The temperature is generally between ten and thirty degrees, and the production process is generally atmospheric, but it will fill in a certain amount of pressure during aerobic fermentation.

Second, the reaction is mild. Microorganisms are alive and the biochemical reactions of fermentation are not very strong.

Third, the raw materials are generally simple and easy to obtain. Generally they are grains, such as starch, glucose, etc.

Fourth, the specificity of the reaction is relatively strong. One of the characteristics of biochemical reactions is that after screening the strains, the specificity of the reaction is much better than the normal chemical reaction.

Fifth, microbial strains are important. It can be understood as a catalyst, but this catalyst is much more important than a conventional catalyst. The core of the strain is the subsequent improvement and optimization of it, such as improvement in the seed production environment, optimization in breeding, and even genetic modification. In the confidentiality of the fermentation process, the confidentiality of the strain is the core.

Sixth, comparing with other industries, industrial fermentation will have quicker and more effective investment effect. Meanwhile, significant economic benefits can be achieved.

### 2. Type of fermentation
First, according to the type of fermentation raw materials. There are fermentation of sugars, fermentation of petroleum products, and fermentation of wastewater.

Second, according to the product to points. There are amino acids, organic acids, antibiotics, alcohol, etc.

Third, according to the form of fermentation. There are liquids and solids. Solid-state fermentation is the nature's original cultivation way, but for industrialized large-scale production, it is generally converted to liquid medium.

For example, Cordyceps sinensis, which is actually a fungus, is also a commonly used strain in fermentation. This fungus grows on the worm body. When the climate changes, when the fungus transforms the nutrients of the worm, the fungus grows. It is. Some pharmaceutical companies have collected the species of Cordyceps sinensis, and they have been acclimated to grow in industrialized medium. The product produced is called Cordyceps capsule.

Forth, according to the fermentation process flow. There are batch, semi-continuous and continuous cultivations.

Fifth, according to the different needs of oxygen in the fermentation process. There are aerobic fermentation and anaerobic fermentation. Aerobic fermentation requires a large amount of oxygen during the cultivation process. A relatively good oxygen supply can be obtained during the original growth of the strain, but in the industrial production process, the fermenter Oxygen is consumed in large amounts in the medium, which can cause hypoxia after being consumed.

### 3. Introduction to the fermentation process
The selected good healthy strains are cultured and grown in the primary seed tank. Meanwhile, the automatic detection system detects the state of the culture medium and the growth and the growth of the strains in time. After reaching the required cultivation criteria, the strain will be transfered to the secondary breeding tank through the transplanting pipeline to continue the cultivation. The strain is continuously divided and grown in the breeding tank. After the fermentation liquid reaches the cultivational density, the strain is transferred to the fermenter to continue the scale culture. Levels 1 and 2 are not absolute, depending on the variety, some are directly to the fermenter, and some have to go through more levels, such as level 4. The cultivation is completed in the fermenter, and the broth is placed in the broth tank for temporary storage.

After the temporary storage of the fermentation broth, the slag and the liquid are separated, and one of them is taken out for post-treatment, and the post-treatment method adopts different processes depending on the fermentation variety. For example, at the beginning of this article’s "Fermentation Video", the fermentation broth is filtered through a ceramic ultrafiltration membrane, and the filtered active ingredient is pumped into a purification kettle for purification. After the purification, the material enters the purification liquid receiving tank, and the clear liquid of the purified liquid filtered through the organic membrane is temporarily stored in the clear liquid tank. After the supernatant is concentrated by a low temperature concentrator, it is passed through a drying device and then proceeds to the next step.

## Fermentation Medium Preparation
The preparation of various nutrients into a substrate for cultivating microorganisms is called a medium. The types of media are as follows:

The first is the carbon source, and the microbes grow up with carbon. There are a variety of carbon sources, the most common of which are starches. The second is the nitrogen source. Commonly used are bean cakes and silk cocoons, as well as urea and ammonia. The third is an inorganic salt.

The medium is divided into a natural medium, a synthetic medium, and a semi-synthetic medium by source. Liquid medium and solid medium are separated by state. The basal medium, the complete medium, the identification medium, and the selection medium are classified according to the purpose. Spore culture medium, seed culture medium and fermentation medium are classified according to the process requirements.

The choice of medium should meet the following requirements:

The medium is capable of meeting the most economical synthesis of the product.

The by-products formed after fermentation are as less as possible.

The raw materials of the culture medium should be adapted to local conditions and the price is low; and the performance is stable, the resources are abundant. Meanwhile they should be convenient for purchasing and transportation, suitable for large-scale storage, and can ensure the supply on the production.

The medium selected should meet the requirements of the overall process, such as ventilation, extraction, purification and waste disposal.

## Fermentation Medium Sterilization
One of the design points in the fermentation process is sterilization. In order to ensure pure seed culture, the culture medium, air system, defoamer, flow feed, equipment, pipeline, etc. should be sterilized before inoculation of the production bacteria. Disinfection is also required in the production environment to prevent the proliferation of bacteria and phage.

### 1. Method of Sterilization
Dry Heat Sterilization

It is like an oven, which is mainly caused by the dehydration of microorganisms, which is characterized by the fact that it is dry after sterilization. Dry heat sterilization is less efficient, such as 60 minutes at 170 °C, 3 hours at 140 °C, and more than 20 hours at 121 °C.

Wet Heat Sterilization

Steam is generally used to denature bacterial proteins in the presence of moist heat, because proteins are more susceptible to denaturation in the presence of moisture. It is half an hour at 121 °C. The advantage is that the steam is easy to obtain, the effect is better, and the management is convenient. The disadvantage is that the equipment’s cost is relatively high and is not suitable for materials that are afraid of moisture.

Radiation sterilization

UV, X-rays, gamma rays, etc. are rarely used in fermentation. 

Chemical sterilization

### 2. Solid Can Sterilization and Continuous Sterilization
There are two methods of sterilization: solid can sterilization and continuous sterilization.

Batch sterilization: suitable for small plants and seed tanks. It means that the medium is heated by steam in the fermenter, and after reaching a predetermined temperature for a certain period of time, the cooling water is passed from the jacket or the coil, the medium is rapidly cooled. In the meantime, the sterile air is pressurized to near the fermentation temperature. At last, the strain is inoculated.
Continuous sterilization: suitable for large-scale plants, the medium is continuously heated and cooled outside the fermenter, and enters the fermenter at last.

The characteristics of the continuous sterilization are as follows:

It can be sterilized by high temperature for a short time, since the material is heated for a short time, it reduces the damage of nutrients which is beneficial to increase productivity.

The total sterilization time is greatly reduced compared with batch sterilization, and the production cycle of the fermenter is shortened.
The steam load is even, which reduce the impact on the heating pipe network.

The heat can be recovered by heat exchanger between the hot and cold materials, and the energy consumption is small.

This kind of fermentation can be adapted to automatic control.

## Air Sterilization
### 1. Methods of Air Sterilization
Heat sterilization. This is basically a dry heat method.

Filter sterilization, generally with absolute filtration and deep media filtration.

The concept of absolute filtration is very simple. For a film with a pore size of 0.2 μm, bacteria larger than this will not be able to pass. However, it is difficult to find such a film in the production process because the pore size of the film produced is not uniform. Therefore, deep media filtering is generally used, i.e. using many layers. Commonly used filters include fibrous or granular media filters, paper filters, and membrane filters. Membrane filters are especially used in terminal filtration.

### 2. Air Filtration Sterilization
The amount of air required during the fermentation process is large. The purpose of air purification treatment is sterilization, but the filter media currently used must work under dry conditions to ensure sterilization efficiency. Therefore, air needs to be pretreated to remove oil, water and larger particles. The choice of air pretreatment process should focus on improving sterilization efficiency. For example, the three-stage aseptic air supply system in "Video" includes air compressors, freeze dryers, filters, air storage tanks, air preheaters, pre-tank pre-filtration and pre-tank sterilization filtration.

## Fermentation Process Control
Difficulties in the control of the fermentation process: process uncertainty and nonlinearity of parameters. The same strain, the same medium in different factories, different batches will get different results, it can be seen that the factors affecting the fermentation process are complex, such as equipment differences, water differences, medium sterilization differences. As well as, the length of the strain preservation time, the nuances of the fermentation process will cause different microbial metabolism.

### 1. Common Cultivation Methods
Batch Cultivation

Batch cultivation is a simple process. After the bacteria are added to the medium, no material is added and removed, except for the introduction and exhaust of air. The parameters of the concentration of the bacteria, the concentration of the nutrient components, and the concentration of the product throughout the process vary with time.

It can also be done under the right cycle and under the right conditions.

Advantages: simple operation, short cycle, less chance of infection, easy to master the production process and product quality.

Disadvantages: low yield, not suitable for measuring kinetic data.

Feeding Batch Cultivation

The fresh feed solution is replenished during the batch cultivation to overcome the shortcomings of premature fermentation due to insufficient nutrition.

In this process, only the addition of the feed liquid happens, so the volume of the fermentation liquid at the end of the fermentation is increased compared to the beginning. In the actual production of the factory, it is the most common method.

Advantages: Maintaining a low substrate concentration in such a system, avoiding the rapid use of the carbon source's repressive effect; achieving optimal growth and product synthesis conditions through feed control.  Besides, a computer can be used to control a reasonable feed rate, stabilizing the best production process.

Disadvantages: As there is no material removed, the accumulation of product ultimately leads to a decrease in the production rate. The addition of materials increases the chance of infection.

Semi-continuous Cultivation

On the basis of feeding batch cultivation, part of the fermentation broth is intermittently released, which is called semi-continuous cultivation. Some varieties take this approach, such as tetracycline fermentation. The biggest application in pharma is penicillin.

Advantages: Part of the fermentation broth is drained, and part of the liquid is replenished, so that the metabolic harmful substances are diluted to facilitate product synthesis and increase the total yield.

Disadvantages: The precursors produced by metabolism are diluted and the total volume extracted is increased.

Continuous Cultivation

During the fermentation process, the same amount of fermentation broth is released while the fresh liquid is added, so that the volume in the fermenter is kept constant. After reaching steady state, the concentration of the bacteria, the concentration of the product, and the concentration of the limiting substrates were constant throughout the process.

Advantages: Controlling the dilution rate optimizes the fermentation process. The fermentation cycle is long and high yields are obtained. The kinetics of bacterial growth can be studied relatively easily by changing the dilution rate.

Disadvantages: If the strain is unstable, long-term continuous culture will cause bacterial degradation and reduce yield. The chance infection is greatly increased in long-term feeding.

### 2. Fermenter Control Scheme
Fermentation production is a multi-stage, continuous process, which involves many controlled objects, but its core and main control difficulties are concentrated on the fermenter. The control goal of the fermenter is to produce more fermented products with lower energy and materials. In order to achieve the target, it is necessary to control parameters such as fermentation temperature, feed, pH value, dissolved oxygen "tank pressure, air flow rate, motor stirring speed" and defoaming.

Temperature Control

PID full digital signal processing, digital control settings, measuring range 0-150 ° C, control range 15-45 ° C, control accuracy ± 0.2 ° C. Circulating water and cooling water automatically control the temperature.

Feed Control

The continuous flow addition method can be adopted, and the flow meter and the electric/pneumatic diaphragm regulating valve can be used to realize the feeding control; it is also feasible to use small amount many times feeding method, and the electrode, the electromagnetic diaphragm valve and the measuring tank can be used to realize the feeding control according to the feeding rate.

Dissolved Oxygen Control

The tank is equipped with an oxygen sensor, and the medium is inspected and measured for dissolved oxygen. The parameters are timely and the speed, the aeration, and the tank pressure are controlled.

pH Value Control

The pH sensor installed on the tank side, online check and measurement medium PH, control accuracy ±0.1, with automatic alarm function.

Pressure Control

The equipment is equipped with high-precision pressure sensor, and the proportional automatic control valve automatically adjusts the pressure inside the tank.

Fermentation not only cares about maximizing yield, but also on production costs and fermentation cycles. The optimization of the fermentation industry is still based on experience. The success of system performance optimization depends on whether the mathematical model of the process and the appropriate optimization procedure can be described. External uncertainties affecting process performance increase the difficulty of accurate modeling. Simple models are unlikely to achieve the best results, while complex models are necessary to increase the computational workload. With the development of computer technology, the optimization of fermentation process With optimized control, the DCS control system provides a platform for optimal control implementation.

## Fermentation Exhaust Treatment
The amount of aerobic fermentation air is very large, generally 1:0.5~1.2 (VVM). For example, a 50-cubic fermenter designed to replenish air according to a tank volume of 0.8 requires 40 square meters/min of air feed. The air is passed to the fermenter, and part of the oxygen is absorbed to emit some carbon dioxide. During the bubbling process, some water is also contained, including medium, living bacteria, etc., and these exhaust gases even have a special unpleasant smell. It is harmful to the human body and the environment and needs to be disposed of.

The exhaust gas is usually separated by a gas-liquid separation method, and the usual method is a cyclone separator. After the separation, the gas phase is mainly wet air. The amount of carbon dioxide is higher than that of normal air, and there are some fermentation metabolites. Because the gas volume is very large, it is now routinely treated by spray washing. In order to eliminate malodorous gases, "oxidant" is often added to the washing liquid, and it is discharged at a high level after treatment.

The waste liquid after cyclone separation may contain active ingredients, that is, active phage. In the first case, if the cell is screened out naturally, the air will have a phage that specifically eats the bacterium. When the bacterium "waste" that is ran out at this time is not treated, it will also grow and grow in the natural environment. Will cause more phage to eat this kind of bacteria. The trouble is that the phage is small and cannot be filtered at all. The concentration of the phage will cause great damage to our production. In another case, the development of genetic technology, many of the strains used in production are not produced by nature, it is done by genetic engineering. The consequences of this kind of engineered bacteria are unexpected, there will be many interlocking reactions. Therefore, after the separation of gas and liquid, the waste liquid should be collected. If there is an active ingredient, it can be taken for refining after collection. If there is no active ingredient, it is necessary to find a way to inactivate it.

## About Fermentation Equipment
### 1. Prevent Contamination of the Bacteria from Equipment Perspective
Through the deep cultivation of the processing precision of the equipment, the risk of bacteria in the fermentation process can be effectively reduced. After many years of efforts, "Zhejiang Shuangzi" has many considerations in equipment manufacturing, such as:
The upper interface of the tank body adopts quick-opening structure/flange connection, and the joint between the interface and the tank body adopts a cold-drawn and stretched circular arc structure, and the bottom interface of the tank body is all close to the tank cavity to ensure that the raw material water is not retained or has dead cleaning angel. Meanwhile the strength and cleaning requirements are ensured.

The dead end of the pressure gauge joint is avoided to the utmost extent, and the interface is equipped with a three-way exhaust or a plug valve. The interface of the pressure gauge can be disinfected to avoid hidden dangers.

The sensor interface uses an external wire or block connection to reduce the risk of contamination.

Peristaltic pump inoculation / feeding, using the extrusion principle to transport materials, reducing the risk of contact between materials and equipment, small footprint, easy to fix, easy to use.

Optimization design of the cooling coil in the tank:

Scheme 1: The traditional serpentine tube is used, but it is connected through an outer coil outside the tank. Only one interface is needed to ensure water return and water, and the equipment pipeline is reduced. The overall layout of the equipment is simple and clear.

Scheme 2: Use spiral tube or U-tube to cool down, the equipment drains smoothly, does not accumulate water, reduces the risk of infection.

Scheme 3: Consider the single, group or overall suppression of the equipment coil.

The nozzle is welded to the equipment interface, the weld seam is flat, and the risk of slag inclusion is not easy to occur, and the hidden danger of the bacteria is small.

The U-tube/spiral tube is applied to the inner tube of the fermenter. Quickly remove the cooling water in the inner ring tube by gravity, speed up the heating time of the equipment, and reduce the energy consumption during sterilization and sterilization of the equipment. There is no water in the inner ring tube, and the disinfection is completely guaranteed.

High efficiency spin type gas-liquid separator. Using gas-liquid impact condensation and centrifugal separation principle, the liquid mist and particles in the gas are continuously separated by a special internal device, and the separation efficiency reaches 95% to 99.9%, which is more than 25% higher than that of the conventional separator.

### 2. Energy-saving Fermenter
The fermenter is a key biochemical reaction equipment in the fermentation industry, with a large amount of surface. Since 1985, "Zhejiang Titan Design & Engineering Co., LTD." has successively developed four new types of high-efficiency, energy-saving, jet-flow, spray-ring and spray-type aerobic fermenters in the fields of pharmaceutical, pesticide, food and light chemical bio-fermentation with provincial identification. The technology has won a national invention patent and several utility model patents. At the same time, it has won the national new product certificate and a number of provincial and ministerial-level scientific and technological progress awards. It is listed as a national key project for scientific and technological achievements to promote and a national key new technology in the "Eighth Five-Year Plan"  to promote.

The results have been promoted and applied in 10 to 770m3 fermenters of more than 100 pharmaceutical, pesticide, food and light chemical production enterprises at home and abroad. After production and application, it shows that comparing the spray aerobic fermenter and the traditional universal fermenter, without increasing the amount of raw materials, compressed air, changing the existing fermentation production process, strains, and reducing the production level of the same period, the following effects can be achieved:

Increased dissolved oxygen coefficient by 30 to 50%.

Increase production by 5 to 20%.

Energy saving 50 to 70%.

The fermentation index or conversion rate is increased by 5 to 10%.

Equipment cost is reduced by 10 to 15%.

Investment recovery period: It takes 3 to 6 months to renovate the traditional fermenter; the new fermenter can be manufactured in 1 to 1.5 years.

## Conclusion
The basic situation to be understood during the fermentation design process:

The process of fermentation, that is, how it is fermented. The most important point is how to avoid the interference of bacteria in the production process, to create a sterile environment, including how to sterilize the medium, how to sterilize the flow, how to sterilize the air, how to ensure the sterility during the transplanting process, etc. For the requirements of fermentation sterility, borrow an expert's golden sentence:

A space for bacteria, a sterile concept and a clean environment.

In the process design process of a fermented product, the design itself is to lead the product, and the product also drives the iterative update of the design.

## Knowledge Information Source

### Zhejiang Titan Design & Engineering Co., LTD.
Zhejiang Titan Design Engineering Co., Ltd. was formerly known as Zhejiang Petrochemical Design Institute established in 1958. It was restructured in 2002 and became a member of China Sinochem Group in 2008. Titan has been engaged in the engineering design of the pharmaceutical industry for 60 years. It has undertaken nearly 1,000 medical projects in and outside the province. The project categories cover bioengineering, APIs, preparations, Chinese medicine, veterinary medicine, medical equipment, pharmaceutical packaging materials, pharmaceutical logistics, health care products, biosafety plant "laboratory", etc. Titan design masters and familiarizes with the application and development of advanced technologies in the pharmaceutical industry both domestically and abroad. More than 30 projects have won various national, provincial and ministerial awards for outstanding design, representing the advanced domestic medical engineering design level.

Titan Design has many technical advantages for fermentation projects:

1. It has a number of patented proprietary technologies, especially patents with new energy-saving fermenters.

2. It has the ability to compile and optimize the fermentation and extraction process software packages.
3. It has the technology of factory simulation, designs can be digitally delivered.
4. It can provide special research on smart energy of the whole plant: such as recycling of fermentation and disinfection steam, waste heat utilization of process compressed gas, etc.
5. It can provide special treatment schemes for fermentation exhaust.
6. With the agency right of mature chromatographic separation technology, special research can be provided.
7. It can provide integrated treatment solutions for waste liquid, waste gas and solid waste.
8. It has the ability to design, manufacture and process mature fermentation and extraction equipment.

### Zhejiang Shuangzi Intelligent Equipment Co., Ltd.
Zhejiang Shuangzi Intelligent Equipment Co., Ltd. is a fermentation system solution and complete equipment provider. It is an innovative high-tech enterprise which provides professional design, manufacturing, installation, pharmaceutical equipment, biological fermentation equipment, plant "Chinese medicine" extraction equipment, vacuum low-temperature belt drying equipment, agriculture, food deep processing equipment and environmental protection equipment.

The company's existing mature products: vacuum low-temperature belt dryer, fermentation system equipment, evaporation and concentration equipment, extraction equipment, separation, extraction equipment, crystallization equipment, filtration equipment, container equipment and other products. It can provide users with engineering, process design, equipment design, engineering installation, complete production line debugging and other services, and provide turnkey projects. The company has an automated pilot production workshop and R&D platform that meets GMP requirements. It mainly includes a complete set of production lines including vacuum low temperature drying, plant "Chinese medicine" extraction, evaporation concentration, sedimentation separation, extraction separation, fermentation, etc., which are well-prepared for users to conduct pilot research.