# 2019001情绪构建论

下面的信息摘自 201903TED「2019003You-aren't-at-the-mercy-of-your-emotions」。作者：Lisa Feldman Barrett。

Emotions are not whaty you think they are. They are not universally expressed and recoginzed. They are not hardwired brain reactions that are uncontrollable. 

We have misunderstood the nature of emotion for a very long time, and understanding what emotion really are has important consequences for all of us. 

You might believe that your brain is prewired with emotion circuits, that you're born with emotion circuits, but you're not. In fact, none of us in this room have emotion circuits in our brain. In fact, no brain on this planet contains emotion circuits.

emotions are guesses.

They are guesses that your brain constructs in the moment where billions of brain cells are working together, and you have more control over those guessess than you might imagine that you do.

Emotions are not built into your brain at birth. They are just built.

And what's really cool is that knowledge which you just acquired moments ago is changing how you experience these blobs right now. So your brain is constructing the image of a snake where there is no snake, and this kind of a hallucination is what neuroscientists like me call "prediction."

Predictions are basically the way your brain works. It's business as usual for your brain. Predictions are the basis of every experience that you have. They are the basis of every actions that you take. In fact, predictions are what allow you to understand the words that I'm speaking as they come out of my mouth.

Predictions are primal. They help us to make sense of the world in a quick and efficient way. So your brain does not react to the world. Using past experience, your brain predicts and constructs your experience of the world. The way that we see emotions in others are deeply rooted in predictions. So to us, it feels like we just look at someone's face, and we just read the emotion that's there in their facial experiences the way we would read words on a page.

So the lesson here is that emotions that you seem to detect in other people actually come in part from what's inside your own head. And this is true in the courtroom, but is also true in the classroom, in the bedroom, and in the boardroom.

Physical movements have no intrinsic emotional meaning. We have to make them meaningful. A human or something else has to connect to the context, and makes them meaningful. That's how we know that a smile might mean sadness a cry might mean happiness, and a stoic, still face might mean that you are angrily plotting the demise of your enemy.

Predictions link the sensations in your body that give you these simple feelings with what's going on around you in the world so that you know what to do. And somtimes, those constructions are emotions. 

Same physical sensation, same churning stomach, different experience.

And so the lesson here is that emotions which seem to happen to you are actually made by you.

You are not at the mercy of mythical emotion circuits which are buried deep inside some ancient part of your brain. You have more control over your emotions than you think you do.

So if you change those ingredients today, you're basically teaching your brain how to predict differently tomorrow, and this is what I call being the architect of your experience.

Now you can cultivate this emotional intelligence yourself and use it in your everyday life. 

That mind racing is prediction. Your brain is searching to find an explanation for those sensations in your body that you experience as wretchedness, just like you did with the blobby image. So your brain is trying to explain what caused those sensations so that you konw what to do about them.

But those sensations might not be an indication that anything is wrong with your life. They might have a purely physical cause. Maybe you're tired. Maybe you didn't sleep enough. Maybe you're hungry. Maybe you're dehydrated.

The next time that you feel intense distress, ask yourself: Could this have a purely physical cause? Is it possible that you can transform emotional suffering into just mere physical discomfort?

But I am telling you that you have more control over your emotions than you might imagine, and that you have the capacity to turn down the dial on emotional suffering and its consequences for your life by learing how to construct your experiences differently.

And all of us can do this and with a little practices, we can get really good at it, like driving. At first, it takes a lot of effort, but eventually it becoms pretty automatic. Now I don't know about you, but I find this to be a really empowering and inspiring message, and the fact that it's backed up by decades of research makes me also happy as a scientist.

But I have to also warn you that it does come with some fine print, because more control also means more responsibility.

